README.md, before:

<!-- vim: set et sw=2 sts=2 spell spelllang=en_us: -->

# [JSON]²

JSON Squared is a tool being developed for lossless conversion between
[JSON](http://json.org) and CSV or Excel format in a sparse
style convenient for editing.

Many libraries exist for converting between JSON and CSV. This library
makes the assumption that your JSON contains many objects with a
similar structure. For each path (list of keys) to a list of objects it
is assumed that the objects in the lists share a similar structure.

Features:

* Compact table format even with multiple nested lists of objects
* JSON types are maintained
* Not limited to data files that fit in RAM, can stream data
  (CSV to JSON) use two-pass method (JSON files to CSV) or use
  intermediate temp file (JSON stream to CSV)
* Simple, clear error reporting for parsing errors

Limitations:

* Repeating keys within the same JSON object is not supported,
  e.g. `{"data": 1, "data": 42, "data": 83}`
* JSON objects in files produced will always have their keys in
  the same order, e.g. `[{"a": 1, "b": 2}, {"a": 2, "b": 1}, ...]`

## Example

address | owners[,] | pets/name | pets/joined | pets/toys[,]
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
12 Oak ave. | Tim K. | Fluffy | 2009 | pink elephant, green ball
 | | Beast | 2011 |
 | | Tiny | 2005 | orange platypus
199 Cliff ave. | June S. | Sophie | 2009 | knotted rope
 | James N. | | | octopus-like thing
 | | | | piranha squeak toy
 | | Theo | 2009 |

Converts to:

```json
[
  {
    "address": "12 Oak ave.",
    "owners": ["Tim K."],
    "pets": [
      { "name": "Fluffy", "joined": 2009, "toys": ["pink elephant", "green ball"] },
      { "name": "Beast", "joined": 2011 },
      { "name": "Tiny", "joined": 2005, "toys": ["orange platypus"] }
    ]
  },
  {
    "address": "199 Cliff ave.",
    "owners": ["June S.", "James N."],
    "pets": [
      {
        "name": "Sophie",
        "joined": 2009,
        "toys": ["knotted rope", "octopus-like thing", "piranha squeak toy"]
      },
      { "name": "Theo", "joined": 2009 }
    ]
  }
]
```


## Simple types

### Reserved values

CSV allows only string values. JSON Squared maintains JSON types
in CSV files by reserving the following string values:

a | b | c | d
--- | --- | --- | ---
null | true | false | {}

```json
[
  {
    "a": null,
    "b": true,
    "c": false,
    "d": {}
  }
]
```

When these strings appear as the value
of a CSV cell, ignoring whitespace on the left and right,
they will be converted to their corresponding special
JSON value.

All letters must be lower-case. No
characters are permitted between the braces for the
empty object.

### Numbers

Any cell value that can be [parsed as a JSON number](docs/number.gif)
will be represented as a number in JSON.

a | b | c
--- | --- | ---
42 | 0.0009 | -1.96e-20

```json
[
  {
    "a": 42,
    "b": 0.0009,
    "c": -1.96e-20
  }
]
```

Commas, whitespace and other separators are not permitted anywhere
within these numbers, or the value will be treated as a
[normal string](#normal-strings).

JSON Squared will maintain the precision of the numbers given
and not introduce any underflow, overflow or rounding
errors during conversions.

### JSON strings

Cell values that have double-quotes as their first and last characters,
ignoring whitespace on the left and right, will be
[parsed as JSON strings](docs/string.gif).

JSON Squared makes a number of allowances so that working with
JSON strings more convenient and less error-prone:

* For Excel-smart-quote-friendliness the surrounding double-quotes
  may be straight (`"`) left (`“`) or right (`”`) quotes. Matching left
  and right quotes is not required.

  The surrounding quotes will be converted to straight quotes before
  parsing. Left and right quotes will not be replaced within the string
  body.

* Straight double-quotes (`"`) within the string body *do not* need to
  be escaped with a backslash. This means means that backslash (`\`) is
  the only character that needs escaping when converting a
  [normal string](#normal-strings) to a JSON string.

  Straight double-quotes in the string body that are not already escaped
  by a backslash will be escaped automatically before parsing.

* Real newline characters may be included in the string body. Newlines
  for just for formatting in the spreadsheet may be backslash-escaped.

  Real carriage return characters (U+000D) will be removed. Next, real
  newline characters (U+000A) preceded by a backslash will be removed
  (as well as whitespace between the backslash and newline).
  Finally any remaining real newline characters will be
  replaced with the newline escape sequence (`\n`) before parsing.

a | b | c | d
--- | --- | --- | ---
"   what's that?" | “she said "hi".“ | "two<br/>lines" | "one \ <br/>line"

```json
[
  {
    "a": "   what's that?",
    "b": "she said \"hi\".",
    "c": "two\nlines",
    "d": "one line"
  }
]
```

JSON strings are typically used for:

* the empty string: `""`
* strings with unprintable control codes, e.g.: `"\u0003\u0000"`
* strings that have significant leading or trailing whitespace
* strings that would otherwise be interpreted as numbers or special
  values, e.g.: `"true"` or `"19.99"`

JSON strings with invalid backslash escape sequences or control
characters can cause parsing errors that will prevent a CSV document
from being converted to JSON.

All errors are collected and reported with a clear reference to the
position of the invalid characters:

greeting |
--- |
"just \saying hi" |

```
Error parsing cell A2: JSON String parsing failed at position 5: "\saying hi"
```

### Extended JSON

JSON is occasionally extended to cover IEEE floating point special values.
These special values are represented as JSON strings with a
backslash-whitespace (`\ `) prefix. This prefix is otherwise an invalid
part of a JSON string.

a | b | c
--- | --- | ---
"\ NaN" | "\ Infinity" | "\ -Infinity"

```js
[
  {
    "a": NaN,
    "b": Infinity,
    "c": -Infinity
  }
]
```

### Normal strings

Any value that is not [reserved](#reserved-values),
a [number](#numbers) or [surrounded by double-quotes](#json-strings)
is treated as a normal string value. Leading and trailing
whitespace is removed. There is no escaping required for any characters.

a | b | c | d | e
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
      what's that? | True | 0x8000 | I said "sure." | c:\sys\net.txt

```json
[
  {
    "a": "what's that?",
    "b": "True",
    "c": "0x8000",
    "d": "I said \"sure\"",
    "e": "c:\\sys\\net.txt"
  }
]
```

## Compound types

### Lists of simple types

Lists of simple types may be represented
collapsed into a single cell by choosing a delimiter, or vertically
in neighboring rows. For lists a `[𝑥]` suffix is added to
the column heading, where `𝑥` is the delimiter chosen.

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19, 14, 18 | green blue

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Tim",
    "rooms": [19, 14, 18],
    "colors": ["green", "blue"]
  }
]
```

Lists continue to neighboring rows if those row do not contain
an element that forces the start of a new object. In this example
a value in the "name" column would start a new object.

A single trailing delimiter may be included in each cell and will
be ignored. These examples are equivalent to the one above:

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19, | green
 | 14 | blue
 | 18 |

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19 | green
 | 14, 18, | blue

JSON strings are supported within lists, but they may not contain
the delimiter used by the list. Lists are split on their delimiter
before string values are parsed.

name | says[,]
--- | ---
Ryan | "hi, there", "friend"

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Ryan",
    "says": ["\"hi", "there\"", "friend"]
  }
]
```

Empty lists in JSON Squared are written as a single delimiter with
nothing in front.

name | pets[,]
--- | ---
May | ,

```json
[
  {
    "name": "May",
    "pets": []
  }
]
```


### Nested objects

JSON objects nested directly inside other objects are represented
by extra columns with the parent name and child name joined with a
period (`.`).

id | name.en | name.fr
--- | --- | ---
190007 | Franklin | Benjamin

```json
[
  {
    "id": 190007,
    "name": {"en": "Franklin", "fr": "Benjamin"}
  }
]
```

### Lists of objects

Lists of JSON objects within other objects are represented
by extra columns with the parent name and child name joined with a
forward slash (`/`).

address | residents/name | residents/age | cars/make | cars/color
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
12 oak ave. | sam | 43 | honda | gray
 | linda | 45 | |

```json
[
  {
    "address": "12 oak ave.",
    "residents": [
      {"name": "sam", "age": 43},
      {"name": "linda", "age": 45}
    ],
    "cars": [
      {"make": "honda", "color": "gray"}
    ]
  }
]
```

### Lists of lists

Lists can be nested in column headings by replacing the list markers
with forward slashes for all but the last level.

name | data[,] | data/[,] | data//[,]
--- | --- | --- | ---
nested | 1 | 2, 3 | 4
 | 5 | 6, 7 |

```json
[
  {
    "name": "nested",
    "data": [1, [2, 3, [4]], 5, [6, 7]]
  }
]
```

Empty lists are used to break up nested lists without adding
elements in between. Choose a delimiter more visible than a comma
for lists containing only lists to help make nesting clearer.

name | data[>] | data/[>] | data//[,]
--- | --- | --- | ---
lumpy | > | > | 1, 2
 | | > | 3, 4

```json
[
  {
    "name": "lumpy",
    "data": [[[1, 2], [3, 4]]]
  }
]
```

This works for lists of lists at the top-level too.

[>] | /[,]
--- | ---
> | 1, 0, 0, 0
> | 0, 1, 0, 0
> | 0, 0, 1, -1
> | 0, 0, 0, 1

```json
[
  [1, 0, 0, 0],
  [0, 1, 0, 0],
  [0, 0, 1, -1],
  [0, 0, 0, 1]
]
```

### Explicit object boundaries

When an object in a list contains no simple-typed values we may need to
mark where that object ends and where the next object in the same list
begins. We use the same method as when we have nested lists: insert an
empty list one level above.

very[-] | very/listy[,]
--- | ---
  | do, re, mi
  | fa
- | so, la
  | ti, do

```json
[
  {
    "very":[
      {"listy": ["do", "re", "mi", "fa"]},
      {"listy": ["so", "la", "ti", "do"]}
    ]
  }
]
```

This works with the top-level list too. Adding an empty list at the
first element isn't required but can look more consistent.

[>] | listy[,]
--- | ---
> | how, are, things
> | fine
  | thanks

```json
[
  {"listy": ["how", "are", "things"]},
  {"listy": ["fine", "thanks"]}
]
```

## Edge cases

### Top-level objects

We use period (`.`) as a prefix in the column heading to indicate keys of a
top-level object.

.title | .things[,]
--- | ---
spelling | cat
 | dog
 | ball

```json
{
  "title": "spelling",
  "things": ["cat", "dog", "ball"]
}
```

### Top-level simple types

For simple types we use a period as a column heading by itself.

. |
--- |
pretty boring JSON |

```json
"pretty boring JSON"
```


### Unusual keys

Keys that are empty strings or strings containing periods (`.`),
double quotes (`"`), forward slashes (`/`) or
opening brackets (`[`) can be given as JSON strings.

odd."" | "\u005B,]" | "\u002F"/"\u002E\u002E"
--- | --- | ---
1 | 2 | 3

```json
[
  {
    "odd": {"": 1},
    "[,]": 2,
    "/": [
      {"..": 3}
    ]
  }
]
```

You must use the Unicode-escaped versions of characters with a
special meaning in JSON Squared column names
or your keys will be interpreted incorrectly. For reference:

Original | JSON Escaped
--- | ---
`.` | `\u002E`
`"` | `\u0022`
`/` | `\u002F`
`[` | `\u005B`


### Mixed value types

Simple types, objects and other lists may all appear as values for the
same keys in different objects by having the same column name specified
different ways. Only one column may be given a value for each object.

id | foo | foo[,] | foo.bar | foo/baz
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
1 | 42 | | |
2 | | 7,6 | |
3 | | | "carbon rod" |
4 | | | | true

```json
[
  {"id": 1, "foo": 42},
  {"id": 2, "foo": [7, 6]},
  {"id": 3, "foo": {"bar": "carbon rod"}},
  {"id": 4, "foo": [{"baz": true}]}
]
```

Within a list we can switch between objects types on different rows while
we build the list.

collection | things[,] | things/id | things/name
--- | --- | --- | ---
heap | 19 | C=64 |
 | | 1541 | disk drive
 | false | |

```json
[
  {
    "collection": "heap",
    "things": [
      19,
      {"id": "C=64"},
      {"id": 1541, "name": "disk drive"},
      false
    ]
  }
]
```

### Empty objects

Empty objects that appear in lists with normal objects must be included
as simple types.

messages[,] | messages/text
--- | ---
 | hello
{} | is there anyone there?
 | no, we're not here right now.

```json
[
  {
    "messages": [
      {"text": "hello"},
      {},
      {"text": "is there anyone there?"},
      {"text": "no we're not here right now"}
    ]
  }
]

```

Commit message:

readme number headings, more delimiter info

README.md, after:

<!-- vim: set et sw=2 sts=2 spell spelllang=en_us: -->

# [JSON]²

JSON Squared is a tool being developed for lossless conversion between
[JSON](http://json.org) and CSV or Excel format in a sparse
style convenient for editing.

Many libraries exist for converting between JSON and CSV. This library
makes the assumption that your JSON contains many objects with a
similar structure. For each path (list of keys) to a list of objects it
is assumed that the objects in the lists share a similar structure.

Features:

* Compact table format even with multiple nested lists of objects
* JSON types are maintained
* Not limited to data files that fit in RAM, can stream data
  (CSV to JSON) use two-pass method (JSON files to CSV) or use
  intermediate temp file (JSON stream to CSV)
* Simple, clear error reporting for parsing errors

Limitations:

* Repeating keys within the same JSON object is not supported,
  e.g. `{"data": 1, "data": 42, "data": 83}`
* JSON objects in files produced will always have their keys in
  the same order, e.g. `[{"a": 1, "b": 2}, {"a": 2, "b": 1}, ...]`

## 0. Example

address | owners[,] | pets/name | pets/joined | pets/toys[,]
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
12 Oak ave. | Tim K. | Fluffy | 2009 | pink elephant, green ball
 | | Beast | 2011 |
 | | Tiny | 2005 | orange platypus
199 Cliff ave. | June S. | Sophie | 2009 | knotted rope
 | James N. | | | octopus-like thing
 | | | | piranha squeak toy
 | | Theo | 2009 |

Converts to:

```json
[
  {
    "address": "12 Oak ave.",
    "owners": ["Tim K."],
    "pets": [
      { "name": "Fluffy", "joined": 2009, "toys": ["pink elephant", "green ball"] },
      { "name": "Beast", "joined": 2011 },
      { "name": "Tiny", "joined": 2005, "toys": ["orange platypus"] }
    ]
  },
  {
    "address": "199 Cliff ave.",
    "owners": ["June S.", "James N."],
    "pets": [
      {
        "name": "Sophie",
        "joined": 2009,
        "toys": ["knotted rope", "octopus-like thing", "piranha squeak toy"]
      },
      { "name": "Theo", "joined": 2009 }
    ]
  }
]
```


## 1. Simple types

### Reserved values

CSV allows only string values. JSON Squared maintains JSON types
in CSV files by reserving the following string values:

a | b | c | d
--- | --- | --- | ---
null | true | false | {}

```json
[
  {
    "a": null,
    "b": true,
    "c": false,
    "d": {}
  }
]
```

When these strings appear as the value
of a CSV cell, ignoring whitespace on the left and right,
they will be converted to their corresponding special
JSON value.

All letters must be lower-case. No
characters are permitted between the braces for the
empty object.

### Numbers

Any cell value that can be [parsed as a JSON number](docs/number.gif)
will be represented as a number in JSON.

a | b | c
--- | --- | ---
42 | 0.0009 | -1.96e-20

```json
[
  {
    "a": 42,
    "b": 0.0009,
    "c": -1.96e-20
  }
]
```

Commas, whitespace and other separators are not permitted anywhere
within these numbers, or the value will be treated as a
[normal string](#normal-strings).

JSON Squared will maintain the precision of the numbers given
and not introduce any underflow, overflow or rounding
errors during conversions.

### JSON strings

Cell values that have double-quotes as their first and last characters,
ignoring whitespace on the left and right, will be
[parsed as JSON strings](docs/string.gif).

JSON Squared makes a number of allowances so that working with
JSON strings more convenient and less error-prone:

* For Excel-smart-quote-friendliness the surrounding double-quotes
  may be straight (`"`) left (`“`) or right (`”`) quotes. Matching left
  and right quotes is not required.

  The surrounding quotes will be converted to straight quotes before
  parsing. Left and right quotes will not be replaced within the string
  body.

* Straight double-quotes (`"`) within the string body *do not* need to
  be escaped with a backslash. This means means that backslash (`\`) is
  the only character that needs escaping when converting a
  [normal string](#normal-strings) to a JSON string.

  Straight double-quotes in the string body that are not already escaped
  by a backslash will be escaped automatically before parsing.

* Real newline characters may be included in the string body. Newlines
  for just for formatting in the spreadsheet may be backslash-escaped.

  Real carriage return characters (U+000D) will be removed. Next, real
  newline characters (U+000A) preceded by a backslash will be removed
  (as well as whitespace between the backslash and newline).
  Finally any remaining real newline characters will be
  replaced with the newline escape sequence (`\n`) before parsing.

a | b | c | d
--- | --- | --- | ---
"   what's that?" | “she said "hi".“ | "two<br/>lines" | "one \ <br/>line"

```json
[
  {
    "a": "   what's that?",
    "b": "she said \"hi\".",
    "c": "two\nlines",
    "d": "one line"
  }
]
```

JSON strings are typically used for:

* the empty string: `""`
* strings with unprintable control codes, e.g.: `"\u0003\u0000"`
* strings that have significant leading or trailing whitespace
* strings that would otherwise be interpreted as numbers or special
  values, e.g.: `"true"` or `"19.99"`

JSON strings with invalid backslash escape sequences or control
characters can cause parsing errors that will prevent a CSV document
from being converted to JSON.

All errors are collected and reported with a clear reference to the
position of the invalid characters:

greeting |
--- |
"just \saying hi" |

```
Error parsing cell A2: JSON String parsing failed at position 5: "\saying hi"
```

### Extended JSON

JSON is occasionally extended to cover IEEE floating point special values.
These special values are represented as JSON strings with a
backslash-whitespace (`\ `) prefix. This prefix is otherwise an invalid
part of a JSON string.

a | b | c
--- | --- | ---
"\ NaN" | "\ Infinity" | "\ -Infinity"

```js
[
  {
    "a": NaN,
    "b": Infinity,
    "c": -Infinity
  }
]
```

### Normal strings

Any value that is not [reserved](#reserved-values),
[decimal](#numbers) or [surrounded by double-quotes](#json-strings)
is treated as a normal string value. Leading and trailing
whitespace is removed. There is no escaping required for any characters.

a | b | c | d | e
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
      what's that? | True | 0x8000 | I said "sure." | c:\sys\net.txt

```json
[
  {
    "a": "what's that?",
    "b": "True",
    "c": "0x8000",
    "d": "I said \"sure\"",
    "e": "c:\\sys\\net.txt"
  }
]
```

## 2. Compound types

### Lists of simple types

Lists of simple types may be represented
collapsed into a single cell by choosing a delimiter, or vertically
in neighboring rows. For lists a `[𝑥]` suffix is added to
the column heading, where `𝑥` is the delimiter chosen.

Delimiters may be multiple characters long to avoid conflicting with
values that may appear. All whitespace in delimiters is significant
and must match exactly to separate list elements.

After separation
each element is parsed as a [simple value](#1-simple-values) as though
it was in its own cell, so normal rules such as removing surrounding
whitespace apply.

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19, 14, 18 | green blue

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Tim",
    "rooms": [19, 14, 18],
    "colors": ["green", "blue"]
  }
]
```

Lists continue to neighboring rows if those row do not contain
an element that forces the start of a new object. In this example
a value in the "name" column would start a new object.

A single trailing delimiter may be included in each cell and will
be ignored. These examples are equivalent to the one above:

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19, | green
 | 14 | blue
 | 18 |

name | rooms[,] | colors[ ]
--- | --- | ---
Tim | 19 | green
 | 14, 18, | blue

JSON strings are supported within lists, but they may not contain
the delimiter used by the list. Lists are split on their delimiter
before string values are parsed.

name | says[,]
--- | ---
Ryan | "hi, there", "friend"

```json
[
  {
    "name": "Ryan",
    "says": ["\"hi", "there\"", "friend"]
  }
]
```

Empty lists in JSON Squared are written as a single delimiter with
nothing in front.

name | pets[,]
--- | ---
May | ,

```json
[
  {
    "name": "May",
    "pets": []
  }
]
```


### Nested objects

JSON objects nested directly inside other objects are represented
by extra columns with the parent name and child name joined with a
period (`.`).

id | name.en | name.fr
--- | --- | ---
190007 | Franklin | Benjamin

```json
[
  {
    "id": 190007,
    "name": {"en": "Franklin", "fr": "Benjamin"}
  }
]
```

### Lists of objects

Lists of JSON objects within other objects are represented
by extra columns with the parent name and child name joined with a
forward slash (`/`).

address | residents/name | residents/age | cars/make | cars/color
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
12 oak ave. | sam | 43 | honda | gray
 | linda | 45 | |

```json
[
  {
    "address": "12 oak ave.",
    "residents": [
      {"name": "sam", "age": 43},
      {"name": "linda", "age": 45}
    ],
    "cars": [
      {"make": "honda", "color": "gray"}
    ]
  }
]
```

### Lists of lists

Lists can be nested in column headings by replacing the list markers
with forward slashes for all but the last level.

name | data[,] | data/[,] | data//[,]
--- | --- | --- | ---
nested | 1 | 2, 3 | 4
 | 5 | 6, 7 |

```json
[
  {
    "name": "nested",
    "data": [1, [2, 3, [4]], 5, [6, 7]]
  }
]
```

Empty lists are used to break up nested lists when not adding
elements in between. Choose a delimiter more visible than a comma
for lists containing only lists to help make nesting clearer.

name | data[>] | data/[>] | data//[,]
--- | --- | --- | ---
lumpy | > | > | 1, 2
 | | > | 3, 4

```json
[
  {
    "name": "lumpy",
    "data": [[[1, 2], [3, 4]]]
  }
]
```

This works for lists of lists at the top-level too.

[>] | /[,]
--- | ---
> | 1, 0, 0, 0
> | 0, 1, 0, 0
> | 0, 0, 1, -1
> | 0, 0, 0, 1

```json
[
  [1, 0, 0, 0],
  [0, 1, 0, 0],
  [0, 0, 1, -1],
  [0, 0, 0, 1]
]
```

### Explicit object boundaries

When an object in a list contains no [simple-typed](#1-simple-types)
values we may need to
mark where that object ends and where the next object in the same list
begins. We use the same method as when we have nested lists: insert an
empty list one level above.

very[-] | very/listy[,]
--- | ---
  | do, re, mi
  | fa
- | so, la
  | ti, do

```json
[
  {
    "very":[
      {"listy": ["do", "re", "mi", "fa"]},
      {"listy": ["so", "la", "ti", "do"]}
    ]
  }
]
```

This works with the top-level list too. Adding an empty list at the
first element isn't required but can look more consistent.

[>] | listy[,]
--- | ---
> | how, are, things
> | fine
  | thanks

```json
[
  {"listy": ["how", "are", "things"]},
  {"listy": ["fine", "thanks"]}
]
```

## 3. Edge cases

### Top-level objects

We use period (`.`) as a prefix in the column heading to indicate keys of a
top-level object.

.title | .things[,]
--- | ---
spelling | cat
 | dog
 | ball

```json
{
  "title": "spelling",
  "things": ["cat", "dog", "ball"]
}
```

### Top-level simple types

For simple types we use a period as a column heading by itself.

. |
--- |
pretty boring JSON |

```json
"pretty boring JSON"
```


### Unusual keys

Keys that are empty strings or strings containing periods (`.`),
double quotes (`"`), forward slashes (`/`) or
opening brackets (`[`) can be given as JSON strings.

odd."" | "\u005B,]" | "\u002F"/"\u002E\u002E"
--- | --- | ---
1 | 2 | 3

```json
[
  {
    "odd": {"": 1},
    "[,]": 2,
    "/": [
      {"..": 3}
    ]
  }
]
```

You must use the Unicode-escaped versions of characters with a
special meaning in JSON Squared column names
or your keys will be interpreted incorrectly. For reference:

Original | JSON Escaped
--- | ---
`.` | `\u002E`
`"` | `\u0022`
`/` | `\u002F`
`[` | `\u005B`


### Mixed value types

Simple types, objects and other lists may all appear as values for the
same keys in different objects by having the same column name specified
different ways. Only one column may be given a value for each object.

id | foo | foo[,] | foo.bar | foo/baz
--- | --- | --- | --- | ---
1 | 42 | | |
2 | | 7,6 | |
3 | | | "carbon rod" |
4 | | | | true

```json
[
  {"id": 1, "foo": 42},
  {"id": 2, "foo": [7, 6]},
  {"id": 3, "foo": {"bar": "carbon rod"}},
  {"id": 4, "foo": [{"baz": true}]}
]
```

Within a list we can switch between objects types on different rows while
we build the list.

collection | things[,] | things/id | things/name
--- | --- | --- | ---
heap | 19 | C=64 |
 | | 1541 | disk drive
 | false | |

```json
[
  {
    "collection": "heap",
    "things": [
      19,
      {"id": "C=64"},
      {"id": 1541, "name": "disk drive"},
      false
    ]
  }
]
```

### Empty objects

Empty objects that appear in lists with normal objects must be included
as simple types.

messages[,] | messages/text
--- | ---
 | hello
{} | is there anyone there?
 | no, we're not here right now.

```json
[
  {
    "messages": [
      {"text": "hello"},
      {},
      {"text": "is there anyone there?"},
      {"text": "no we're not here right now"}
    ]
  }
]

```
